>> Hi. And welcome to the session
of OpenGL ES Shading and Rendering.
My name is Luc Semeria and joining
me on stage will be Alex Eddy.
We are both part of the Embedded
Graphics Acceleration team here at Apple.
Here is the agenda for today.
We're going to start by talking about shaders
and how to write shaders in OpenGL ES 2.0.
Then in the second part of this presentation,
we'll talk about advanced rendering
techniques to make your games look even better.
So if you have been writing applications over the last year
for the iPhone and the iPhone Touch using OpenGL ES 1.1,
you are going to learn today how to write shaders
and particularly making use of OpenGL ES 2.0.
We're also going to learn in the
second part of the presentation how
to make advance rendering effects in
both OpenGL ES 1.1 and OpenGL ES 2.0.
If you've been working on OpenGL on Desktop,
a lot of this may look like a review.
You probably have written shaders already and have
used a lot of the OpenGL state techniques as well.
But we'll find out some of the key
differences between ES and Desktop.
And, you know, along the way you're
probably going to learn some new tricks.
So let me start by a review of OpenGL ES
2.0 and the programmable graphics pipeline.
So here is the overview of the pipeline.
If you've been to the presentation,
you have already seen that slide.
Well, this is the OpenGL ES 1.1
fixed function graphics pipeline.
Let me just go through it quickly and just highlight a
few of the points that are relevant for OpenGL ES 2.0.
So you start with your model that's
composed of, you know, primitives.
Triangles typically.
And the corner of those triangles are vertices.
So in the first stage, you break those triangles into
vertices and you pass them to the vertex processing stage.
That's particularly those, the
transformation of the coordinates
from model space through eye space into window space.
That's also, where you compute your textual coordinates.
That's also, where lighting is typically done.
Once you've done all this, the vertices
with the correct windows positions go
through the primitive assembly block
that puts those back into triangles.
Then those triangles get rasterized into separate fragments.
Those fragments correspond to pixels
that are going to go on your screen.
So each of those fragments are sent
to the fragment processing stage.
And in a fixed function pipeline this is where
you do your textual loads, combine your textuals.
This is where you do your fog computation and alpha testing.
Then what you end up at the end of the
fragment processing stage is a color
that you can dynamically display on your screen.
What changes with OpenGL ES 2.0?
Well, OpenGL ES 2.0 is a programmable graphic pipeline.
What it means is that really the two boxes that
are highlighted here, the vertex processing box
and the fragment processing box, are now programmable.
And the way you program those two stages are using shaders.
So we have our two programmable shaders
and they look like regular code.
Almost looks like C.
And this code gets compiled and
linked to run as a program on the GPU.
So just like you would, you know, write C code, and
compile anything in that C code to run on your CPU, well,
in OpenGL ES 2.0 you write GLSL, which is a
programming language we use for those shaders.
And we compile and link those shaders to run on the GPU.
It's accelerated on the GPU.
And this allows you to do more effects
than what you can do on OpenGL ES 1.1.
Here are some examples.
You can do tangent space bump mapping,
especially if you do skinning.
You can do better on the cubic environment map.
You can do better effects like reflection.
You can do better image processing and, you know,
this is programmable so it's really up to you.
You can put your own algorithm in those
shaders and compute the effects that you want.
So that was an overview.
Now, let's dive down and see how you
actually write one of those shaders.
So there are two kinds of shaders as we have seen.
There is the vertex shader and there is a fragment shader.
Well, first we are going to look at the interface in the
overview of both the vertex shader and the fragment shader.
Then we'll dive down into really
how you write this GLSL code.
So the vertex shader, as I mentioned, replaces
existing OpenGL ES 1.1 fixed functionalities.
So namely, the vertex shader is where you
compute your vertex and normal transformation.
Where you go from model space into window space.
This is also, where you do transformation on your fixture
coordinates, and you can pass those fixture coordinates
to the fragment shader to start drawing things.
This is also, where lighting equations are
implemented if you do textured effects lighting.
But you can do way more things in
the texture since it's programmable.
This is where you can distort geometry, as
you have seen in the first illustration.
This is also, where you can do skinning easily
and many more effects that you can come up with
What is the interface of the vertex shader?
The vertex shader has two kinds of inputs.
The first kind of inputs are called attributes.
And attributes are specific to each vertex.
These are the characteristics of each vertex in your model.
So an example of attributes are the coordinates of
each of those vertexes in model space specifically.
The normal to each of those vertex
tangents or whatever your model has.
Now, there is another kind of inputs,
which are called Uniforms.
And the reason why they're called Uniforms is
because their value is uniform throughout the model.
So these are constant data as far as the model is concerned.
An example of Uniforms that you may want to pass
to the vertex shader are your matrix
transformation, your transformation matrices.
The light coordinates, because the light is going to
be fixed for all the different vertexes in your model.
So based on those inputs, the attributes and the Uniforms,
the vertex shader is going to compute a set of outputs.
And the set of outputs of a vertex shader are called
varyings because they vary from one vertex to the other.
The varyings are defined for each vertex,
and they get interpolated and passed
to the fragment shader to be used in the fragment shader.
So an example of outputs, the first one is the
position in window space of the specific vertice.
Picture a coordinate that you want
to pass to the fragment shader.
Colors, you name it.
How does that look inside in the pipeline?
Let's take a look.
So we have our vertex shader that's
following the primitive processing block.
So we receive a bunch of vertices and the vertex
shader is going to run on all of those vertices.
We have a set of generic attributes coming into the vertex.
So if you are finding out with writing shaders on Desktop
you will notice here that we only have generic attributes.
There are no predefined attributes.
Likewise, we have a set of Uniforms.
They are all generic Uniforms.
No predefined Uniforms in OpenGL ES 2.0.
And based on those two inputs, the attributes and the
Uniforms, the vertex shader is going to write varyings.
Again, there are a lot of generic varyings
that you can use for anything you want.
Colors, texture coordinates, so on and so forth.
There are two predefined varyings.
The first one is GL position.
This is a position in window space of
your vertex that's computed in the shader.
If you are drawing points, you can also
set the point size in the vertex shader.
You must always write to GL position.
You must always set the position of your vertex so
that it can be used in the later stages of the pipeline
so you can render something on the screen.
Let's now look at the fragment shader.
So the fragment shader also replaces existing fixed function
blocks in the fragment's processing units in OpenGL ES 1.1.
So things you would do in a fragment shader?
This is where you do your texture loading.
This is where you can combine textures.
This is where you can do your fog computation.
This is where alpha testing happens
if you need alpha testing.
But you can do a lot more things.
Again, it's programmable.
So this is where you could do per pixel
lighting, per pixek bitmapping.
You can animate pixels.
Anything you want.
Again, the fragment shader has a set of inputs and
based on those inputs compute a set of outputs.
The inputs are the varyings.
The varyings are well defined in the vertex shader.
They get interpolated in the rasterization
stage and passed to the fragment shader.
So these are the inputs of your fragment shader.
Example of such varyings are the positions,
the texture coordinates, the color.
You know, whatever you put in those varyings.
The other kind of input to your
fragment shader are also Uniforms.
Uniforms that are going to be constant
throughout all the fragments in your model.
So things you would pass here.
Your fog characteristics, which
texture you need you want to load from.
Any of those characteristics you want to pass in.
Based on those inputs the fragment shader
is going to compute basically one output,
which is the color for the pixel that
corresponds to the fragment on the screen.
You also have the option to discard that
fragment so it doesn't get drawn on the screen.
Well, how does that fit in the pipeline?
The fragment shader follows the rasterization stage,
and this is where bearings are getting interpolated
from the vertex shader to the fragment shader.
There are all the generic varyings that you defined in
your vertex shader that can be read in the fragment shader.
There are three predefined bearings
coming into the fragment shader.
The first one is the fragment color, and then the
chosen ones are the facts whether or not the primitive
to which the fragment belongs is
whether this primitive is pointing.
Is FrontFacing or BackFacing, so this is in GL FrontFacing.
And if you are drawing points, the point
coordinates within the points that you are drawing.
The other sets of inputs are the Uniforms, right?
There are Uniforms for all those.
That are constant for all those fragments.
And you can also load from multiple texture units.
Based on all those inputs you can
compute the fragment color.
And again, if you want to draw the pixel on the screen
if you don't discard it, you must write to FragColor.
So we've seen the overview of what the fragment
shader and what the vertex shader does.
And we've seen the interface, what's
coming in and out of those shaders.
Let's now look at how we can actually
program one of those shaders.
The way you program one of those shaders
is through a language called GLSL.
The OpenGL shading language.
And GLSL is select, you know.
It has a main function, it's procedural.
And you get it compiled and linked to run on the GPU.
It doesn't have any of the kind of dynamic features
of scene, no pointers, no goto's, no recursions.
It's just simple C code.
But it has several extensions to
make it usable for graphics.
And in the last few slides, I just want to highlight
some of the specific extensions or features of GLSL.
But first, let's start with a very simple example.
This is probably the C+ shader you can write.
Here what I'm doing is I'm just writing a constant
color, white, to all the fragments in my model.
And so if I have the good old teapot it's
going to be all white and flat on my screen.
This is kind of the matching vertex shader.
This could be even C probably.
This is pretty simple and typical vertex shader.
What we do here is we have two kinds of inputs.
We have the attributes that corresponds to
the position of each vertex in my model.
And then we have the Uniform.
That's my model view projection
transform matrix that I'm going to use
to transform those position coordinates
from model space into window space.
And so in the main function all I do is I
multiply my 4x4 matrix model view project matrix
by my for valued position vector.
And I end up with the transformed position that
I passed as the following stages of the pipeline.
So let's look at it in little bit more detail.
First thing, you notice at the top are the inputs and
outputs definitions that are part of the global definitions.
So you have a set of storage qualifier that
you can use to define those inputs and outputs.
So you have the attributes of storage qualifier to
define, you know, your core vertex attribute inputs.
The Uniform qualifier to define these other Uniforms
of the fragment shader or the vertex shader.
The varying storage qualifier that's
used to define the outputs
of your vertex shader and the input of your fragment shader.
And if you have constants and you want to let the compiler
know that those variables are going to be constant
and can be optimized, you can use
the const storage qualifier as well.
Any language as datatypes.
So GLSL has all the basic datatypes
that you're familiar with.
Floats, integer, Boolean.
It also has vectors.
It can have two component, three
component, four component vectors.
And they can be of type floats, integer, Boolean.
GLSL ES has also square matrices that are always for input.
So if on Desktop you have non-square
matrices here, we have only square matrices.
All those datatypes are either
logical or arithmetic datatypes.
So they have the usual operators that are defined for those.
And what's interesting here is multiplier
operator all these different matrices.
So you can use multiplier operator
to do matrix multiplication.
You can use the multiplier operator to do a matrix
by a vector multiplication, just
like we did in the original shader.
Now also datatypes, such as the central datatype.
The central datatype is used to pass in the information
about which textual unit you want to load from.
And there are also standard datatypes, arrays,
structures, and you use them just like you would them in C.
In addition to the operators I mentioned, GLSL
has also a wide variety of built-in functions.
So here is a list.
It's not complete, but it's already
quite a few, built-in functions of GLSL.
I'm not going to go into details
on one of those but, you know,
you can recognize your favorite
arithmetic built-in functions.
You know, sine, cosine, power,
absolute value, so on and so forth.
I want to highlight some that are specific to graphics.
So if you have a vector you can
normalize it using the normalize function.
If you want to implement reflection or refraction, you
have built-in functions to help you in your algorithm.
You have specific functions to do your textual lookup.
And we also support the derivative functions
that are part of an extension in GLSL.
So you can do derivative in the
X dimension of the Y dimension.
With all this, you can start writing more real shaders.
So here is also a fairly simple
example that does textual mapping.
Here is my vertex shader.
It looks pretty much the same as the one I showed before.
There is one more attribute we have here.
It's the texture data that is part of my model.
And in this case in the main body of the function we
are just passing that through to the fragment shader.
I'm also outputting this textual coordinate as a
varying so that I can pass it to the fragment shader.
And I have my usual, you know, position model view defined
by the model view projection matrix
multiplied by the position.
If you've seen shaders on Desktop you've probably
seen that people use ftransform everywhere.
Well, ftransform was not part of
my initial building functions.
So in GLSL ES you need to explicitly do your computation.
This is part of the fact that we
don't have predefined Uniforms here.
They are all generic Uniforms, so you just define
which model projection matrix you are going to use.
So here we computed our texture coordinate
varying that gets passed to the fragment shader.
And here in the fragment shader I'm
going to load from two different textures
and just combine them by adding the colors.
So I have 2D Uniforms.
Texture1 and Texture2 that are defined as sample2D Uniforms.
And I use the texture2D function to
load from those two textual units.
And then I just simply add those two colors
and assign that to my fragment color output.
If you look at this shader a little carefully you
will notice two things I haven't mentioned yet.
Highp and lowp.
These are GLSL ES specific precision type qualifier.
Well, this is something that doesn't exist on Desktop.
This is GLSL ES specific.
And what they mean is that the way you use them is you
use them to specify to the compiler that the variables
that you defined using those qualifiers
have a reduced precision.
So you can use lowp.
Low precision, medium precision, high precision.
And these are just compiler hints to let
the compiler know about this limited range.
So for example, if you add the color and you know
the color is not going to go out of the range -2 to 2
and you only 8 bits of precision for that color, well,
you can use the lowp qualifier for that color variable.
But what happens if you don't use any precision qualifier?
Well, in your vertex shader you don't have to.
This is defined for you.
There is a predefined default precision,
which is high precision.
So you don't need to worry about
precision in your vertex shader.
This high precision.
But the OpenGL ES specification leaves the default
precision in the fragment shader as undefined.
As a result you must define a precision for all your
floating point variables in your fragment shader.
But the way you do this is simply by adding one
statement typically at the top of your shader that says,
my default precision in my shader is going to be,
in this case, high precision for all my floats.
And then the rest of your shader can be just a generic
shader and you don't have to worry about precision.
Notice that if you define a default
precision for float that applies to vectors,
matrices, arrays, floats and so on and so forth.
So putting this all together this is how, you
know, a typical fragment shader would look like.
At the top you have your default, you know, precision setup.
And in the rest of the program it's
a pretty much a generic shader here
and we just use lowp here for colors, but you don't have to.
So this gives you an idea of what a shader looks
like, so now you know how to write a shader.
Express your computation, your
algorithm in one of those shaders.
How do you actually use it inside your application?
Well, the way you do that is, as I mentioned, you
have your fragment shader, your vertex shader.
And they get compiled and linked into a program.
And the way you do all this is
through the typical OpenGL APIs.
So to compile a shader, like the vertex shader, the
first thing you do is you create a name for the shader.
You create a shader object.
Then you attach your source card to
that shader object you just created.
Then you can compile your shader.
Make sure the compilation has succeeded.
You do the same for the fragment shader.
Now you have both fragment and
object shader that are compiled.
You can create your program.
You attach the compiled vertex shader
and fragment shader to your program.
Now that you have attached both compiled fragment
and vertex shaders you can link your program.
Verify that link has succeeded.
And then you can use the program and
start drawing things on the screen.
This is something you want to do in this
initialization step of your application.
You don't want to compile and link
your shaders while referring.
This is part of the initialization part of your application.
This is good.
Now you have your program ready.
But how do you actually set the inputs
so that something gets computed, right?
So the way you do that is you set your attributes and
Uniform values, and typically you do that for every frame.
If things move, Uniforms may change for every
frame or attributes may change for frames.
And now a couple of things you want to do still in the
application, in the initialization of your application.
After you link the program you want to query
the location of your attributes and Uniforms.
And then in the main body of your application
after you selected which program you want to use,
then you use the location that you just, you know,
queried in this initialization to set the Uniform values.
Then you can set all sorts of attribute values.
And then you draw things on your screen.
So that's pretty much all the steps that
are involved to create and run the shader.
So with that, let's go to the demo
machine and actually see how it looks.
[ Silence ]
So here what I have is a simple Xcode
project that's basically the template.
If you have used OpenGL ES 1.1 over the last
year, you probably have seen this template.
And you can find the usual files here.
The one thing I changed here is instead of using
OpenGL ES 1.1, I switched to OpenGL ES 2.0.
So let's go and look at where we initialized our
GL context and see how we compile and link things.
So I'm jumping to the function in it with color.
This is where GL is being initialized.
And if we scroll down a little bit we can see
that here I am creating my OpenGL ES 2.0 context.
Make sure that the context gets created.
If I'm on one of the iPhone 3G or
iPod Touch, then this would fail.
Then the next thing I do is I call
the function that's going to compile
and link my shaders, so let's jump into that function.
This function is using a separate
function that does the compilation part,
so let's look at the compilation part first.
That's the function compile shader here.
So what I do here is for the vertex shader and the
fragment shader here I'm creating the shader object.
I get a name.
Then I attach the source code for that shader that
was initially stored in a file that I'm reading.
Then I can compile my shader.
And then for debugging, say if I did the syntax there in
my shader or any other error, I need to check the info log
because this is where all the warnings
and errors are being stored.
So in this log here I'm dumping all this onto the console.
And this works both in the simulator and on the device.
After I checked and printed those
error and warnings messages,
I make sure that the compilation has
succeeded by checking the compilation status.
And then I return my shader.
Now in my main compilation and linking
function, you can see that, you know,
I compiled both the vertex shader and the fragment shader.
Now I can create the program.
The way I do that is I create the program.
I attach the two shaders, vertex and fragment shaders.
And in this case here I am buying my
attributes, and then I link the program.
Same thing here for debugging.
I want to print my error and warning messages.
This is what I do here by checking the info log.
And I make sure that linking succeeded.
Then I can query the Uniform locations
that I had in my model.
And I'm going to use this later in the main loop
to set both the attributes and the Uniforms.
Then I can use the program.
So let's take a look at in the simulator how this looks.
So here we go.
This looks pretty much like the simplest
shader I showed you before, right?
Here we have the good old teapot, flat color.
Let's make it more interesting.
So here I'm bringing up the source code
for most of my vertex and fragment shader.
Let's start with the vertex shader.
What I'm doing here is just computing the position based on
the model view projection matrix multiplied by the position.
Let's add some lighting to this.
So I already set up the input so
I can compute lighting here.
And the way I compute lighting is I
take the normal attributes that I have
in my model, and I have the light direction.
And here what I am doing is just to use lighting.
Some very, very simple lighting.
And I just do the dot products of the normal
for the vertex with the light's direction.
That's Uniform because the light
is not changing for every vertex.
And if both align then I want to make things brighter.
And if they are in opposite directions I make things darker.
So I just compute the dot product here, and I assign this
to the light bearing and pass this to the fragment shader.
While I'm there I'm also going to pass the
pixel coordinates to my fragment shader.
Let's now look at the fragment shader.
Here in the main body of the code we can see that
we set the color to a constant value, yellow.
So this is why everything is yellow.
Let's now use lighting.
And the way we do that is we just modulate the light,
the color, by the light component that I just computed.
Let's run that and make sure the lighting works right.
So I can check that it's lit properly.
In animated, it works fine.
Let's make it a little more interesting.
You know, as I said, you know, you can
do texture loads in your fragment shader,
so let's use those texture coordinates
and do some texture loads here.
So I have a Uniform coming in that tells from
which texture I want to load my data from,
and I just use my texture coordinates
to load the color for that fragment.
And then to make it slightly more interesting
I use that color and use that color to lookup
into a palette to make things more colorful.
And that's going to be my final color.
So let's run this.
And now we have our little teapot
that also has a texture on that to it.
And I can also, in this case, I passed in a Uniform
so that I can animate the way I look up in my textures.
So this is a little plasma effect.
I can use this to do also some simple water effects.
Also effects that you would see in the second session.
So with this, you know, I'd like
to hand it over to Alex who's going
to show you more interesting rendering techniques.
>> OK. So, so far you've seen an
overview of the OpenGL ES pipeline.
And Luc gave you an overview of GLSL, the shading language.
What it is.
What you can do with it.
And how it works.
Now, for the rest of the session I'm going to be
talking about some advanced rendering techniques.
How you construct and use all this information to
make some pretty pictures show up on the screen.
And I'll be touching on a couple of different
topics here, starting with some 3D effects.s=tylY
Then I'll talk a little bit about 2D and image processing.
And finally I'll wrap up by combining 2D and 3D together.
And I'll be talking about how to achieve these
rendering techniques and effects in both ES1 and ES2.
Now, that's because, as you heard on the keynote on Monday,
there are now 40 million iPhones and iPod Touches out there.
That's a very large installed customer
base, so this device is running ES1.1.
And that number is still growing.
We are still selling iPhone 3Gs and the new
iPhone 3GS supports both ES1.1 and ES2.0.
So we think that ES1.1 is still important
and relevant to your application.
And as we'll see a lot of these effects
can be done in both ES1 and ES2.
But why are we talking about this at all today here?
Why do we care about rendering techniques?
Well, it's a pretty simple answer.
We just want you to make your application
look as best as it possibly can.
OpenGL is about more than just
drawing flat textured quasma screen.
There's a lot of depth and functionality in this API.
And there's a lot of silicone there
in the GPU waiting for you to use it.
So we want you to use that hardware acceleration to its
fullest, and make your gaming application look really great.
Now, in a little more detail OpenGL
provides multiple attributes to you,
and you can combine these in different ways.
You can also use multiple texture simultaneously.
And a really key point to achieving a
lot of these effects is learning how
to combine textures together in interesting combinations.
In ES1 that means using APF features like the Texture
Matrix, or the Texture Environment combine modes.
In ES2 of course you're going to use
program mover or text and fragment shooters.
We can do all these things and a lot more.
Now, to give you an idea about
what type of effects we're talking
about let's go to the iPhone and look at a live demo.
[ Silence ]
Now, here you can see I had a pretty good looking 3D scene.
What are we looking at specifically here?
Well, I have an interactive 3D skybox, and I have
an anti alias good looking tesilated model here
that I can interact with and zoom in and out.
And you notice, if you look at this carefully, that
the object is reflecting the environment around it.
It's not just a flat textured object.
The object is responding to the
environment, and it's not just the reflection.
There's actually a little bit of
dynamic part to this reflection,
so it reflects around differently
when you put in how it's oriented.
So this effect is an environ map using a fresnel term
that dynamically changed how the environment is reflected.
This is an example of the type of effect
we're going to build up today step by step.
And you can do these effects in
both ES2 using shaders and in ES1.1.
Now, there are several other effects built into this demo.
Just to give you a brief look at the
type of effects we're talking about,
I want to go through a couple of them quickly.
This effect has a couple models also.
If you like car games here's how
that same thing looks on a car.
And just to give you an idea, that fresnel term by
itself kind of gives you this edge highlighting effect
so we see the edges are lighter than
the middle of the body of the car.
If you combine that with some lighting we're going to get a
couple interesting backlighting and room lighting effects.
Or we could use that fresnel term
for different purposes like blending.
And we can make some interesting actually budding effects,
which may change interactively to
achieve a variety of blending styles.
Or a couple other ideas for effects here.
We could do some none photorealistic
renderings such as toon shading.
Again, this can be done with hardware
acceleration in ES2 and in ES1.
For a more complicated version of this you
could do some anisotropic lighting effects
and maybe I'll show the good old teapot here again.
You can see you can get a kind of
nice looking brushed metal effect.
So this is just a very quick overview of the
effects we'll be talking about in this session.
I'll go back to the slides.
Now hopefully you're asking yourself
how can I do that in my application?
And let's be honest here.
The first step is to learn OpenGL.
To do these kinds of advanced rendering
techniques you're going to have to learn OpenGL
and get comfortable with these in the pipeline.
Now we don't have time to teach you everything about
OpenGL in this session, but I want to point out a couple
of those hidden knobs and switches in the pipeline to
show you how you can start taking control of the pipeline
and make these kinds of interesting effects.
We'll also be looking at an example of how you can
redefine your problem, or your rendering technique,
in terms that your OpenGL API can understand,
and the hardware can conceal and accelerate.
In ES1, again that means using
texture coordinates and features
like the texture matrix and the
texture environment combiners.
In ES2 the same thing can all be done with shaders.
We'll also be looking at breaking complicated effects
into multiple pieces using multipass and rendered texture.
So let's get started looking at the pipeline.
Now you've already seen today an overview of the pipeline.
I want to go into just a little
more detail in a couple key parts.
In each part I'll show you how
the pipeline is typically used,
and how you can modify the behavior a little
bit to get some more flexibility out of it.
So starting with vertex attributes here, anytime you
draw something with OpenGL you're defining a bunch
of data that OpenGL is going to transform.
Those are the vertex attributes.
Things like the position and the
color and the normal and so on.
And there are a lot of ways that you could lay
out that data for OpenGL to consume.
But here's a diagram of a pretty typical way a bunch
of different attributes can live
in a single vertex buffer object.
Now you can see the attributes here on
things like the XYZ position, the normal.
Maybe there's a texture coordinate ST or a per vertex color.
And when you want to tell OpenGL to use this data,
you first tell it what the data is and where it is.
With these APIs like VertexPointer or
TexCord Pointer, you point GL to the data
and you say it's 2 floats or 2 bytes or whatever it is.
And then you call draw erase or draw
elements and that kicks off the pipeline,
pushing this data into the transformation
stage so the OpenGL starts processing it.
So that's the next stage.
Vertex transformation.
Now again, this is a pretty standard overview of the
pipeline here where the positions are coming in on the left,
and they're transformed through a series of
spaces, eye space and clip space and so forth.
Finally ending up in window coordinates.
And I want to point out here that your inputs into this, the
way that you can control this pipeline, are these matrices.
The modelview matrix and the projection matrix.
This is your control to tell OpenGL
how to transform the data.
To scale it or rotate it or project it.
How do you want to change the data so it shows
up on the screen directly for your application?
You're probably all familiar with this
already, but I'll point out another part
of this that you may not have used before.
We also have texture matrices.
The hardware has multiple texture units, and each
of those units has a matrix associated with it
which works just like the other matrices.
Except that instead of transforming the position
data, it transforms the texture coordinates coming in.
And they work just the same way.
You can do the same transformations
like scale or rotate or projection.
Anything you can do with a 4x4 matrix.
As we'll see this is extremely useful
for influencing and addressing effects.
The first is just a little thought
experiment for you to think about.
You'll probably recognize this.
This is the Touch Fighter application that we
showed a year ago with the iPhone SDK 2.0 launch.
And if we remember you're flying around this 3D
planet while you're battling these aliens in space.
Now that planet is defined with some 3D geometry.
It's a sphere.
And as the game plays the planet is rotating towards you.
By rotating those positions by the modelview matrix.
Now if you think about it, you could achieve the
same type of effect by using the texture matrix.
Instead of rotating the position if
you leave the positions where they are,
and instead rotate the texture
coordinates around the geometry.
It's exactly the same rotational transform what you do
on the textual matrix instead of the modelview matrix.
Now why would you want to do that?
Well, it depends on your application.
But here you can see that you can't
see all the planet at the same time.
If you're never rotating it you're
never going to see the back part of it.
And in fact, in this picture you're never
going to see the bottom half of it either.
So maybe you can get away with defining less geometry.
If these are texture matrices this way
you could save yourself some video memory,
and you could save yourself some transform costs because you
have less vertices to push into the pipeline to transform.
So there's a simple example.
And now we've talked about basically
all of the vertex transformation stage.
Finding attributes and transforming them.
So that takes us to the fragment part of the pipeline.
Now Luc showed you how ES2 has a really flexible
fragment pipeline with the programmable power of GLSL.
In ES1, you're a little more constrained to what you can do.
And the fragment pipeline is really
defined in terms of texture combiners.
So here's a diagram showing you what
type of things you can do there.
You have a couple of inputs coming in which
are things like the primary vertex color.
That's the lit color that was processing the vertex stage.
You also have textures coming in that
you're sampling from on the current unit.
And with those inputs you can do some
very simple math operations like modulate.
That's a multiply or an add or a subtract.
And a couple of other simple operations like interpolate
or dot product which are really just multiplies
and adds combined into a single operator.
After these operations are done, you can additionally scale
the result by 1 or 2 or 4, which gives you a little bit
of extra flexibility for creating effects.
And I want to point out here that the color data
that you're working with is all clamped to [0, 1].
So that's both this vertex color and the texture color.
This can be a little problematic for some effects
which seem to work with a wider range of data.
But in the 2D section of this talk I'll
show you a way how to get around that.
And I also want to point out here that again
the hardware has multiple texture units.
So you can combine these texture environments together
to create more interesting complicated effects.
For example in the first unit you might do a
multiply between the primary color and the texture.
In the second unit do an add from a different texture.
For example, add a highlight.
Now the number of texture units depends
on the hardware you're running on.
On the MBX base devices you have 2 units.
And on the new iPhone 3GS you have 8 units available.
This kind of limit is a thing that you can query out
of OpenGL dynamically at run time in your application
so you can be sure that your algorithm
will work in available hardware.
Now what happens if your algorithm doesn't
fit in the units that are available?
You query it and you find you have 2
and that's not enough for your effect.
Well, you can break your algorithm down into
smaller pieces using multipass rendering.
There are a couple of ways to do this, but
a simple way is simply render the first part
of your effect to the framebuffer normally.
Then in the second pass change the state you're using.
Maybe use different textures, different
combiners, and render the second half
of the effect using blending to add
the result into the framebuffer.
Drawing the same object for the same position,
but with different state and blending turned on.
It's a pretty simple trick, but it
works in built-up complicated effects.
Another similar approach is to use render to texture.
Here is the same idea, except instead of
rendering the first pass to a framebuffer directly,
you create a temporary texture to
capture the intermediate results.
And that texture can then be fed into second or possibly
multiple additional passes to build up more parts
of the effect or do post
processing or image filtering.
And the final result is drawn back to the real framebuffer.
So that's the points I wanted to touch on the pipeline.
Just a bit of summary there comparing ES1 and 2.
In ES1 you only have a couple of
attributes available to you.
Things like the normal and the
toucher coordinate and the positions.
And the transformations you can do on those are
fairly limited because it's a fixed function pipeline.
Although I showed you how to use a texture matrix
to get a little more flexibility out of it.
And again in the final stage you're pretty limited in what
you can do because you only have simple math operators.
But there's a very large number of ways that you can combine
those operators together to create interesting effects.
And because there's only a couple of texture
units available on the MBX based devices,
you often have to break rendering
techniques into multiple passes.
By comparison, in ES2 you have a lot more flexibility.
You have more attributes available and they're completely
generic for you to define and use it anyway that you want.
You also have the full power of GLSL, the
programmable vertex and fragment shaders.
So you can do all of the things you
did in ES1 plus a whole lot more.
Now let's use all the information I just described
to build up one of these effects step by step.
And we'll look at that environment map sample
that I just showed you at the beginning.
So let's start out by making a completely reflective object,
and then we'll improve the technique a little bit to add
that fresnel term and make it look a little more realistic.
Now the concept behind this kind of technique
is that we have a 3D model which= has a bunch
of attributes defined for a vertex like such as the normal.
What you can see here the normals are pointing
out in all directions from this model.
We also have a texture which in this case contains
a spherical projection of the environment,
as if you are looking around the
scene from the center of this object.
Now the basic idea is that we want to take the normal in
one of those vertices, and use it as a texture coordinate.
And to do that the normal will be transformed and
projected into 2D space to lie on this texture.
Wherever that projected point lines up on the texture
we'll use that color for that vertex of the model.
And if we do that for all the vertices it ends up looking
like the object is reflecting the environment around it.
Now here's how you can achieve that in ES2 using the shader.
So for starters the vertex shader.
Now you can see at the top there I have an
attribute coming in which is the normal.
I also have a Uniform defined which
is that environment matrix.
Now this matrix is calculated by the
application during every framed animation
to match the current rotation of the
object as its being moved around.
That way the normals are transformed the
same way that the object is rotating.
And the body of the shader you can is pretty simple.
The first line of code is simply using
that matrix to transform the normal,
and it's passing it out as a texture
coordinate to be used in the fragment stage.
The rest of this is very trivial.
It's simply passing through the vertex
color that was defined in the model.
And it's doing the standard transformation on the
position to go through eye space and clip space.
Here's the fragment shader.
Now start out with the model is completely
reflective, so this is very simple.
You have the texture coordinate coming in which is
just computed in the vertex shader.
And you can see that I used the texture sheeting function
to look up that environment color in the texture,
and I simply assign it to the output and I'm done.
The entire model is reflected using an environment map.
Now the slight improvement on this is to add a fresnel term.
In this case I'm using the mix function which is built
into GLSL to interpolate between that environment color
and the original vertex color of the model.
And I interpolate in here by the alpha
channel of the texture that I just looked up.
In this case the application has repaired
the alpha channel with the fresnel term,
which is simply a gradient ramp
that falls off from black to white.
So that's how you can achieve this
kind of effect in ES2 using shaders.
You can do the same thing in ES1.
Just a little trickier.
So going back to this partially the pipeline
that I touched on look at the vertex attributes.
Now normally when you have texture
coordinates you tell OpenGL
to point the texture coordinate pointer
at that texture coordinate data.
Now here's a trick.
Don't do that.
Instead, point texture coordinate pointer at the
normals which are already defined in your vertex data.
Now those normals can be treated
as if they were texture coordinates
and you can transform them by the texture matrix.
So here's the texture matrix stage.
And the idea here is that the normals
were defined in unit space
so their 3D normal is pointing in
all directions on the unit's sphere.
The first thing that's going to happen to this is
they're going to be rotated by the modelview matrix,
so the thing matched the orientation of the
object for the current frame of animation.
Additionally we need to scale and bias that normal
data to fit in the range 0 to 1 so that we can use it
as a texture coordinate to look on the 2D environment map.
Here's the code in ES1 that sets that up.
Now you can see the first thing that happens
is I set the matrix mode to the texture.
After that it's using the same API that you're already used
to, doing some translates and scales and matrix multiplies,
but they're going into the texture matrix.
And in the simple case where the model is completely
reflective, the texture combiners are simply set
up to completely replace the color with that texture.
A small additional improvement of the fresnel
term changes a couple lines of code here to set
up an interpolation operator in the fragment stage.
And here again you can see that it's interpolating between
that environment texture and the primary vertex color.
And it's interpolating by the alpha
channel of that same texture.
So this is a pretty simple effect,
but it ends up looking good.
Now to really drive this home, let's go back
to the iPhone and build this up step by step.
[ Silence ]
So here we are back in the 3D scene.
And if I back up a couple of steps here you
can see now that I'm visualizing the normals
which are defining this object as colors.
And in these two this kind of a debug visualization is
really easy to do, because you have the normals coming
in as attributes and you can simply
assign them directly to the color.
It's really easy to visualize the data and how
it's coming in before you do any operations on it.
In ES1 this is a little harder, but it basically uses the
same tricks that I just showed you using the texture matrix.
To do that in ES1 you can define a couple of special debug
textures like this which are simply ramps to go from black
to red and black to green and black to blue.
Now you can see how the normal data defined in
the model here is mapping to the texture colors.
So for example, all the normals are pointing
downwards on this plane are being mapped
to the green at the bottom of this first texture.
And all the normals that are blue on the right side
of the plane are being mapped to the
right side of the second texture.
So that's the basic setup.
The next step of this effect was to transform
the normals by modelview matrix to keep them
in the same orientation relative to the camera.
So if I go there you see the coloration
has changed a little bit.
Now regardless of how I rotate the object around you see
the normals are always pointing in the same direction.
In this case blue is always pointing towards
the camera, and green is always pointing
down regardless of how the object is being rotated.
Once the state is set up, either in the shader or
using the texture matrix that I've just shown you,
all you have to do is replace these
textures with the real environment map.
Now the object looks like its completely reflective.
Small, simple addition to use in the fresnel
term in the alpha channel looks like this.
In here, you can see the alpha mask and the alpha channel
in the same texture is simply the gradient in the sphere
which goes from dark in the middle
where the object needs to be using more
of the original vertex color as
on the parts that are facing you.
To lighter and then actually white on the edges
of that sphere for the edge parts of the model
that are perpendicular to the camera
are going to be completely reflective.
Now with a little more work it's possible to
dynamically change the context of this texture
to change how the environment mapping is happening.
I make it completely reflective again, or I can change the
falloff term to get a wide variety of artistic effects,
depending on the type of object and
the type of an effect you're going for.
So that's an environment map using a fresnel term.
Now. Thank you.
[ Clapping ]
Now we don't have enough time in this session to go
through this much detail on all the other effects.
But I want to go through them again to show you how these
basic concepts can be built upon and expanded to build
up a variety of other interesting effects.
So if you look at just the fresnel term again,
here again you can see that it's kind
of highlighting the edges of the model.
And if you combine that with something else that's not an
environment map, for example a regular vertex lighting,
you can get kind of this backlighting
or room lighting effect.
Here you can see it's kind of highlighting the
edges of the model regardless of the orientation.
And this kind of backlighting effect has
been popularized recently in a couple
of console games you guys may be familiar with
Or another idea is use the same kind of
fresnel term for something other than lighting.
And again you could use it as a blending factor.
So here you can see that the parts of the card
that are directly facing you are transparent,
while the parts that are perpendicular
are being dynamically blended together.
And again you could dynamically change the content
of the texture to change how the blending looks
and build up a variety of interesting effects.
Now the same type of technique using the texture
matrix can get you these kind
of effects like toon shading.
Again here, you know, I can interact with this
a little bit to move the light source around.
Luc showed you earlier the very basic lighting technique
of n.l. That's a normal dot product with a light.
Well, you can do that with the texture matrix.
You're feeding in the normals of attributes you
can put the light vector into the first column
of the texture matrix and have
it do that dot product for you.
Once you have that lighting term, that can be used to
lookup in this kind of compared texture with a couple
of grayscale ramps in it and make this
kind of none but realistic effect.
And of course it's all hardware accelerated.
The more advanced variation on that is to do both
diffuse lighting term and spectral lighting term.
So it's n.l, nn.h, where h is the halving the
vector between the light vector and the eye vector.
So here again with a specially prepared texture you can
achieve a wide variety of anisotropic lighting effects.
Now take a second and compare this
to the vanilla OpenGL lighting.
Here's what that looks like with just
the diffuse and spectral lighting terms.
Now what do you want your application to look like?
So hopefully you can see how if
you use the features that are built
into the API you can really dynamically increase
the quality of the rendering in your application.
This is what we want you to be able to do with OpenGL.
Now so far all these techniques that I've shown you
are implementable both in ES2 with shaders and in ES1.1.
And of course with ES2 you can go much further than this.
You have shaders, so let's take a look at an example
of a couple of effects that you need shaders to do.
So here, and now deforming the teapot, and this is
doing a custom transformation of the vertex shader.
As Luc pointed out there are a lot of map
functions built into the shading language.
Things like sine and cosine.
So it's actually quite easy to make
this kind of custom transformation.
This actually looks pretty good on the car model.
And if I change the environment terms there you
can see how it's deforming both the vertex position
and also the normals, so the environment
map track the positions correctly.
So, very easy to write with GLSL and the ES2.
Here's another example using the fragment shader.
So here this is the same environment map
effect, except at the end of the shader
where I have the color calculated I'm going to use
that color as a texture coordinate into a special kind
of texture like this which contains a palette.
And again, a Uniform could be used
to animate this coordinate
around to change the values a little bit every single
frame to make this kind of thermal imaging effect.
Now this is what we call an independent
textual lookup or a dependent texture read.
This type of thing cannot be done in ES1.1.
You have to have ES2 for the shaders
to do this kind of effect.
So that's about all I'm going to talk
about on the 3D section of this talk.
We'll go back to the slides.
So I showed you a bunch of different effects,
a lot of which can be done both in ES2 and ES1.
There's lots of more examples.
You can come up with your own by
combining all these techniques together.
In ES2 there's even more.
You have all the power of GLSL to you, and I'm really
interested to see what you can do in this next year
when you get your hands on the iPhone 3GS.
And to change topics let's talk
about 2D and image processing.
These iPhones all have cameras built into them.
It's pretty natural that you might want to take a photograph
and then manipulate the pixels in the image a little bit.
For example, maybe you want to make a grayscale version
or change some brightness or contrast,
or rotate the user round.
These types of simple image processing
can be accelerated with OpenGL.
Again, both in ES2 using shaders
and it turns out also in ES1.1.
So let's take a look at a simpler
filter which is a grayscale conversion.
There are a couple different ways you could do
grayscale conversion, but the simplest version is
to just simply make an average of
the red, green and blue channels.
So if you multiplied them all by .33 and add them
together, you get the average illuminance value.
And here you're looking at GLSL fragment
shader to do that kind of effect.
And the key part of it here is this dot product operation.
That dot product is doing its multiplies and add's.
And you can see that I first took a sample out of the
texture and I'm doing a dot product with these weights
which are just simply constant values like .33.
It's a very simple shader.
You just use grayscale in this processing effect.
Now you can also do this in ES1.1,
although again it's a little trickier.
And here the texture environment gives you an operator
which is a Dot3 to do these kinds of dot products.
But that operator is really designed
to do bump mapping using normal maps.
So if you want to use it to process regular
colors and image, like a photograph,
you first have to bias the data into the proper range.
Now you can do this by using an interpolation.
So you'd have your original image there.
You can use an interpolation towards white to
squish the data into the proper range of .5 to 1.
Once you have done that you can then use
an additional unit to do a Dot3 operator
and find the average color converting
the image to grayscale.
So that works into our accelerated
and actually runs pretty quickly.
Here's the code showing you how to set up in
ES1 and I'm not going to go through all this.
But you can see the basic idea is that
the first unit is doing interpolation.
The second unit is doing the dot product.
And you notice there on the top the weights that are being
used have also been biased and scaled into the proper range.
Instead of being .33 they end up being .667.
Now that's one filter.
For a little more advanced image processing theory
there's a nice little set out there, a Graphic Obscura,
with a couple articles that I thought were pretty good.
And one of them points out that you can
do a variety of imaging processing effects
by using simple interpolation and extrapolation operations.
So in this table you take the center
1.0 column as the original image.
You could interpolate towards a degenerate
version of the image, like a grayscale copy.
And you could achieve all the intermediate
desaturative values as you interpolate towards it.
Or if you extrapolate away from
it you get the opposite effect,
increasing the saturation and making
the colors more vibrant.
Or another example, if your degenerate image was a blurred
copy you can get all the intermediate and blurred values
for the interpolation, or get the opposite
effect of sharpening the image by extrapolation.
Now this is an interesting topic because it's
not immediately obvious how to map this acronym
to OpenGL, especially in the confines of ES1.1.
The left-hand side of the table is just interpolation
which turns out it does map really directly
to the interpolate operator which
you can do in texture environment.
But as I pointed out earlier all those terms in this
texture combiner have to be in the range of 0 to 1.
So that includes not just the pixels and the texture,
but also this interpolator value T here that we're using.
So how to you deal with this if you want
to extrapolate where T is bigger than 1?
Well, it's actually pretty easy.
You could use a little bit of algebra.
You can substitute in 2T for example.
And then factor out that 2 to redefine this equation.
Now all of the terms including T
are back in the proper range 0 to 1.
Now remember the texture environment can
multiply the result of an operation by 1, 2 or 4.
So this all maps to the hardware
to be accelerated, even in ES1.1.
Now let's go back to the phone and take
a look at that to see how it performs.
[ Silence ]
So here you can see I have a pretty
looking butterfly wallpaper
with a couple of modes at the bottom of the slider.
And it works pretty much just as you expect.
I drive my finger on the slider and the effect updates.
So I'm going to change the brightness
here or other effects like the contrast.
Decreasing contrast or increasing it.
And hopefully you notice here that this
is completely fluid and interactive.
This is being accelerated with OpenGL, and the image updates
just as fast as I can move my finger around the slider.
This is running full screen at 60 frames a sec`ond.
Here's a saturation operation.
Desaturating to grey or increasing the
saturation to increase the vibrancy of the colors.
You can do this in both ES2, of course, or in ES1.1.
And it turns out that you can do this in
ES1.1 even on the first generation iPhones
at completely fluid frame rates if you use OpenGL.
Here's another effect which we haven't
talked about which texture rotation.
Now rotating colors in OpenGL is
really just like rotating vectors.
It's the same math of the matrix side of the vector,
except that instead of XYZ for position it's RGB.
Well, matrix multiplies nothing more than a couple of dot
products, and those dot products map to the Dot3 operator
which is available in a texture environment.
So again this can all be accelerated.
And finally, another example interpolating towards
a blurred version image we're extrapolating away
from a desharpening image.
And again, this is all completely fluid and interactive,
and a full screen 60 frames a second even in OpenGL ES 1.1
So there's an image processing on static 2D data.
But if we stay on the phone here for a second it turns
out that we can do the same types of things in 3D.
So here we're back in the 3D screen with this object again.
Now watch this.
Now I've run a full screen image
processing filter on my dynamic 3D scene.
And you'll see it's still nice and interactive.
So what's happening here is I'm doing the first
pass rendering the 3D geometry into a texture.
And then additional processing is happening.
So you do that exact same grayscale
conversion filter that I just showed you in 2D.
And of course there's a whole huge
variety of effects we could do here.
For example, here's a bloom filter.
Everybody's favorite filter maybe.
Where a blurred version of the image is
being added back on top of the original scene
to get that kind of dreamy, bloomy, glowy feel.
Or you can do more in mass processing which use the 3D
depth information of the scene that you've just rendered.
For example, here's depth of field.
Now here you can see that as I move the object
off into the distance it becomes blurry.
And in the midground it's in focus.
And in the very close foreground it becomes blurry again.
And this is being done by using all the tricks
that I've just shown you in this session.
In this case I'm transforming the
window coordinate position, the Z value,
by using the texture matrix transforming
into texture coordinate.
And I'm looking up into this specially
formatted texture which contains a focal point.
And again, I can animate what's in that texture to
dynamically change the focal point of the scene.
I can bring the near part of the plane
in focus, or the midground or foreground.
So there's some advanced image processing techniques.
And of course you can combine all these things.
So you can go through all these effect
with image processing turned on.
And then you do the most complicated version in this demo,
combining the vertex deformation using
the shader with a full screen processing.
And you can see it still runs just fine.
[ Clapping ]
So go back to the slides.
Let's talk just a little bit about
image processing in full screen.
And the trick there is really to use framebuffer objects.
As I pointed out earlier you can do rendering
texture operations with framebuffer objects.
And the basic idea is to render the 3D scene
in that first pass into a temporary texture.
That texture should test the framebuffer object.
Secondly, after the texture has a content in it we
can use that texture as input to additional passes
of processing such as post-screen imaging processing.
And the final result gets written into the framebuffer.
Now it turns out that you already
know how to use framebuffer objects.
You're using them all the time, any
time you draw anything on an iPhone.
And as was shown in the first session this diagram
is showing how framebuffer objects interact
with the EAGL windowing system, just to get it kind
of on the screen on the screen in the first place.
The only change to this setup you
have to make to render to texture,
is instead of using a color render
buffer, you use a color texture.
And this texture is just like any
other texture that you already use.
You gen it, you bind it, you define the format
and the width and height with GL tech image.
And after you have the texture created you attach is
to the framebuffer object with GL framebuffer texture.
At that point that FBO is ready for you
to render that first pass of content into.
So here's an example of how that bloom effect is built up.
Is using multipass of render to texture.
And that first set was to render a
3D scene into a texture with an FBO.
And then additional processing is done to it.
And the first step I did was to
downsample it, and this does two things.
First, it blurs that scene a little
bit which is good for bloom.
It also reduces the number of pixels that we're going to
be processing, because the more and more steps that we have
of course there are performance overhead there.
So downsampling is good to reduce the flow rate.
Secondly, I can do a real blur operation to really
fuzz that image out, and also darken it a little bit
so that only the bright parts of the original scene
will end up contributing to the overall bloom effect.
Finally, once I have that version of the image I
can simply add it back on top of the original frame.
And that combines to form the final
bloom effect that you saw.
Now there are a lot of other examples here.
I showed you depth of field, probably the
most complicated one using all these tricks
to change the focal point interactively.
And that's really about the end of this session.
So to wrap this up the key points here are that to get
the most of OpenGL you're going to have to learn OpenGL.
There's a lot of functionality here, and we
touched on some key points which in ES2 is all
about using the vertex and fragment shaders.
In ES1 it's about using the capability you have.
The attributes that you have and the fixed
function transformations you have doing things
such as using the texture meters to give a
little more flexibility to that pipeline.
You can also use texture combine to combine
multiple textures together in interesting ways.
And we talked about breaking down
complicated rendering techniques
in the multiple stages by using
things like render to texture.
Now there's a whole bunch of tutorials
out there on the Internet
where it can teach you all these
types of things about OpenGL.
But I want to point out the one that's
been there all along which is OpenGL.org.
There's a section there on OpenGL.org
which has tutorials and sample code.
And in particular they've collected a bunch of these
scene graph presentations from previous years which are
about the advanced OpenGL rendering techniques.
Now those sessions predate OpenGL
ES, so they won't work directly
on your iPhone, but the concepts there are still good.
And with a little work you can port those
examples onto the phone at OpenGL ES.
Also for more information about programmability and the ES2,
there are a couple of good books
which have come out recently.
There's the new OpenGL ES 2.0 guide which is the gold
book, although it's supposed to purple and not gold.
There's also the big orange book, the
Open GL Shading Language reference.
Both of these have a lot of information
about GLSL and the programmable pipeline.
So if you have interest in that please check these out.